Title: Trello vs. Asana
Date: 2016-06-23
Author: Chris
Slug: trello-vs-asana
Category: Engineering Management
Status: Published

In two totally different companies over the past 4 years, across
different personalities, teams, and processes, I've seen Asana
rejected no fewer than a dozen times in favor of Trello, in spite of
multiple executive mandates to use Asana.

<!-- PELICAN_END_SUMMARY -->

In both companies, management (of which I am a part) made a hard push
to use Asana. Everyone gave it a shot, and then somehow ended up back
on Trello.

I gave up on foisting Asana (or any other task management tool) on my
teams in 2013, but I can't quite convince everyone else that it's a
futile practice. I think all managers eventually learn this lesson
though; it's hard to make teams use tools that don't fit their hands.

But that's something to explore another time. Here, I just want to
think about why *specifically* Asana keeps getting surreptitiously
replaced with Trello as soon as management stops paying attention.

Both tools aim to do about the same thing, and have comparable feature
sets. They can both operate as Trojan horses; if a department wants to
use it, they just start using it; there's no installation or setup
period. But management seems to prefer one, and actual workers seem to
prefer the other.

Here's what I think is going on:

# Asana

There are projects, tags, sections, and subtasks. And they are all
kinda-sorta similar and you can pivot tasks along any of those
dimensions. On top of all of that, there are roadmaps, and
pipelines. You can sort and filter and drill down and through and
around on everything.

The result is great for managers. It's easy to see who is working on
what, and how tasks are connected, and where things stand.

The result is terrible for employees. What am I supposed to be working
on? Where are all my tasks? What is the top priority? Every view gives
me a slightly different answer to these questions. I have a general
sense that things are slipping through the cracks.

# Trello

There are boards. Boards have lists. Lists have cards. Cards have a
bunch of stuff. Pretty much the only way to look at anything is via a
board, full of lists, full of cards.

This is extremely annoying if you are trying to figure out, for
instance, "what is Chris working on right now?", or even "What did
Chris do last week?". Because things are spread across
boards<sup>[1](#footnote1)</sup>, and because Trello cards don't have
any status, there's just no real way to do any kind of reporting.

On the other hand, one of our most used Trello boards is called
"Jordan can you please..." and just contains a ton of projects and
tasks (list and cards) Jordan is working on. This works extremely
well, and it has a funny name, which is always a bonus. If you want
Jordan's help with something, guess where you put the card? And if you
want to see the status of your card, guess where you look?

# In Conclusion

I've had very few meetings to discuss across teams how we might
organize our Trello boards. There aren't a ton of options, and who
cares anyway, since there's no benefit to standardization since there's no reporting.

I've had a lot of "How should we all use Asana?" meetings.

Trello makes it easy to manage my own work, and that of my immediate
colleagues. Asana makes it easy to manage other people's work. No
surprise that managers like Asana, but every time they look at the
screens around the office, everyone is using Trello.

### Notes

<a name="footnote1">1</a>: Not to mention I still cannot for the life
of me figure out how organizations or teams really work in Trello.
